Snapshot (#74)
iotaledger/IOTA-2.0-Research-Specifications: 7.1 Snapshot.md

# 7.1 Snapshot

## 7.1.1 Introduction
This section defines the *Snapshot* protocol.

## 7.1.2 Dependencies
The *Snapshotting* protocol depends on:

+ Timestamps: Core module to enable pruning.
+ Tip Selection Algorithm: No messages can be referenced for the part of the Tangle that is being pruned.
+ UTXO: Transactions whose outputs are unspent, remain after the snapshot.

> + Branches: We require that the at the point of pruning only master branch and rejected branch exist.

Author: OTV+FPCS must decide on whether a transaction is liked or disliked much before the point of pruning. See line 16

I assume similar to FPC also FPCS has a maximum round after which the protocol force stops (maxRound). the maximum round should not be reached, because otherwise there is possibility for agreement failures. 

Lets talk quickly FPC: there the typical round number when conflicts even with metastabillity attacks were resolved in FPC was 10 (so 10*10sec). And the FPC protocol kind of ensures this. We should also require this property for FPCS and my feeling is that it will perform actually better.

+ Markers: We require that the part of the Tangle being pruned is not actively dependent on Markers any more. 
+ Approval weight: We require that the approval weight is concluded at a time much before messages reach the pruning age.
+ Voting: We require that any voting is concluded much before messages reach the pruning age. 
+ Data flow: The past cone check must be relaxed (???TODO)

## 7.1.3 Proof of Inclusion and Pruning

> In order to keep the ledger concise data that is sufficiently far in the past can be removed. We call this process pruning. Thus, the IOTA protocol for a standard node does not attempt to keep all information back until the genesis. Rather the protocol effectively becomes a filter mechanism to proof whether a certain message was at some point in the past included in the ledger. This can be done e.g. through a Merkel tree proof. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to keep the ledger concise data that is sufficiently old can be removed. We call this process pruning. Thus, the IOTA 2.0 protocol for a standard node does not attempt to keep all information back until the Genesis. Rather the protocol effectively becomes a mechanism to prove whether a certain message was, at some point in the past, included in the ledger. This can be done e.g. through a Merkle tree proof. 
```

> Transactions are a special type of message, that cannot be pruned. Specifically when a transaction contains an unspent output, see [5.1. UTXO](./5.1%20UTXO.md), the transaction shall be kept when pruning the ledger. An optimization of this process is possible by reducing the message to only keeping the information about the unspent outputs, however the implementation will be more complicated, and thus is omitted in this first iteration of the protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transactions are payloads of value messages, that cannot be pruned. Specifically when a transaction contains an unspent output, see [5.1. UTXO](./5.1%20UTXO.md), the transaction shall be kept when pruning the ledger. An optimization of this process is possible by reducing the message to only keeping the information about the unspent outputs, however the implementation will be more complicated, and thus is not considered for this first iteration of the protocol.
```

> Transactions are a special type of message, that cannot be pruned. Specifically when a transaction contains an unspent output, see [5.1. UTXO](./5.1%20UTXO.md), the transaction shall be kept when pruning the ledger. An optimization of this process is possible by reducing the message to only keeping the information about the unspent outputs, however the implementation will be more complicated, and thus is omitted in this first iteration of the protocol.

Author: sorry this should be "pruned when unspent". This is corrected now.

## 7.1.5 Pruning dependencies

> We require several conditions to be fulfilled in order to allow for a smooth pruning process. Pruning is done when messages reach the age `DELTA_PRUNE`. 

Author: the age of a message is the now minus timestamp. i have added this definition.

> Since messages cannot attach to a message whose timestamp has an age difference of more than `DELTA`, see [4.3.4 R-URTS](./4.3%20Tip%20Selection%20Algorithm.md/#4.3.4%20R-URTS), and the timestamp precision is enforced through voting, see [4.2.3 General Timestamp rules](./4.2%20Timestamps.md/#4.2.3%20General%20Timestamp%20rules). Finalization of messages must be guaranteed to happen before the point of pruning. Thus, any message must be either confirmed or rejected before the elapse of the pruning age. This requires that both voting on timestamps and conflicts, as well as the accumulation of sufficient approval weight takes a time much smaller than `DELTA_PRUNE`. 

Reviewer: Beware since we are thinking about removing timestamp voting.

Author: ```suggestion
Since messages cannot attach to a message whose timestamp has an age difference of more than `DELTA`, see [4.3.4 R-URTS](./4.3%20Tip%20Selection%20Algorithm.md/#4.3.4%20R-URTS), and the timestamp precision is enforced through voting, see [4.2.3 General Timestamp rules](./4.2%20Timestamps.md/#4.2.3%20General%20Timestamp%20rules). 
Finalization of messages must be guaranteed to happen before the point of pruning. Thus, any message must be either confirmed or rejected before the elapse of the pruning age. This requires that both the filtering out of messages with wrong timestamps, voting on conflicts, as well as the accumulation of sufficient approval weight takes a time much smaller than `DELTA_PRUNE`. 
```

> Since messages cannot attach to a message whose timestamp has an age difference of more than `DELTA`, see [4.3.4 R-URTS](./4.3%20Tip%20Selection%20Algorithm.md/#4.3.4%20R-URTS), and the timestamp precision is enforced through voting, see [4.2.3 General Timestamp rules](./4.2%20Timestamps.md/#4.2.3%20General%20Timestamp%20rules). Finalization of messages must be guaranteed to happen before the point of pruning. Thus, any message must be either confirmed or rejected before the elapse of the pruning age. This requires that both voting on timestamps and conflicts, as well as the accumulation of sufficient approval weight takes a time much smaller than `DELTA_PRUNE`. 

Author: yes. its the same as with IOTA1.0 . There the number of milestones are the clock. 
FPC provided such guarantees in regards to conflicts.
With AW the situation is the following: as long as the tip pool does not grow unbounded and a high percentage of mana issues messages regularly then the confirmation time will be in the seconds. 

It could make sense to introduce some Tangle time that only advances if a high % of mana has been seen. Using the Tangle time for calculating the age check would decrease risks with pruning imo.

> Since messages cannot attach to a message whose timestamp has an age difference of more than `DELTA`, see [4.3.4 R-URTS](./4.3%20Tip%20Selection%20Algorithm.md/#4.3.4%20R-URTS), and the timestamp precision is enforced through voting, see [4.2.3 General Timestamp rules](./4.2%20Timestamps.md/#4.2.3%20General%20Timestamp%20rules). Finalization of messages must be guaranteed to happen before the point of pruning. Thus, any message must be either confirmed or rejected before the elapse of the pruning age. This requires that both voting on timestamps and conflicts, as well as the accumulation of sufficient approval weight takes a time much smaller than `DELTA_PRUNE`. 

Author: We can also extend the rule to not prune what is not confirmed, but for now it would make the rule more complex without much advantage.

> In order to allow a smooth pruning, any message at the age `DELTA_PRUNE` must either belong to the branch `masterBranch` or `rejectedBranch`. This simply means that messages are either confirmed or rejected. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to allow a smooth pruning, any message at the age `DELTA_PRUNE` must either belong to the branch `masterBranch` or to a rejected branch. This simply means that messages are either confirmed or orphaned. 
```

> Transaction must pass a past cone check, see [### 2.4.4.6 Booker - Point 7.](./2.4%20Data%20Flow.md/#2.4.4.6%20Booker). However the past cone check cannot apply to messages below a certain age `DELTA_PASTCHECK<<DELTA_PRUNE`. Thus, the past cone check there needs to be relaxed (???TODO).

Reviewer: Its not clear what its supposed to mean here.

Author: i have updated this section.

> With the above conditions we can safely assume any message before the time `DELTA_PRUNE>>DELTA` can be pruned. 

Reviewer: From the text, its not clear for me the requirements for a message to be pruned and why the checks described satisfy it. Perhaps we could organize the requirements in itens? It should solve most of this.

Author: ```suggestion
With the above conditions we can safely assume any message before the time `DELTA_PRUNE>>DELTA` can be pruned. In summary this is for the following reasons:
- Timestamps are sufficiently accurate.
- Messages can only create parent-child relationships up to a predefined age.
- Branches are cleaned up at the depth of pruning, i.e. all messages that have pruning age are either confirmed or rejected.
- Transactions are only removed once all of their outputs are confirmed spent. 
```

Author: This is a really important point. Could you check if the above made this more clear? @GalRogozinski @darcy-camargo

Reviewer: Gave a bit more information on the age restriction. Also there is any reason you are avoiding using the word "pruning" with value messages?

```suggestion
With the above conditions we can safely assume any message before the time `DELTA_PRUNE>>DELTA` can be pruned. In summary this is for the following reasons:
- Timestamps are sufficiently accurate.
- Messages can only create parent-child relationships up to a predefined age that is more recent than the messages timestamps.
- Branches are cleaned up at the depth of pruning, i.e. all messages that have pruning age are either confirmed or rejected.
- Transactions are only pruned once all of their outputs are confirmed spent. 

```

Reviewer: imo you could make the "requirements" and "explanations" before this line also in topics, would help with reading.

Author: @darcy-camargo  i wasn't aware i was avoiding it. Could you point me to a line where this is the case?
 also added another bullet list for clarity.

## 7.1.6 Pruning process

> An output is considered *confirmed* spent, when the transaction spending an output is confirmed. A flag `confirmedSpent` *shall* be set to `TRUE` in the metadata of the output when this event is triggered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An output is considered *confirmed* spent, when the message containing a transaction spending it is confirmed. A flag `confirmedSpent` *shall* be set to `TRUE` in the metadata of the output when this event is triggered.
```

Once a message reaches the age `DELTA_PRUNE` several checks are performed:

+ If the message is a data message it can be removed. 
+ If the message is a value message and is rejected, i.e. is member of the `rejectedBranch` it can be removed.
+ If the message is a value message and is confirmed, i.e. is member of the `masterBranch` it is checked, whether any of the outputs is unspent, i.e. not confirmed spent. 

> + If all outputs are confirmed spent the value message is removed. 

Reviewer: This is conflicting with "Transactions are a special type of message, that cannot be pruned.", we need to change this.

+ If any of the outputs is unspent, i.e. not confirmed spent, the message *shall* be stored, and its references to parents are set to the `genesis`.

## 7.1.7 Post pruning

> Transactions that are unspent at the time of pruning, remain in the database. Once all their outputs are confirmed spent, i.e. the flags `confirmedSpent` are `TRUE`, the transaction is deleted.

Reviewer: The transactions not being deleted cannot create some sort of database attack similar to dusting attacks?

+ Timestamps: Core module to enable pruning.
+ Tip Selection Algorithm: No messages can be referenced for the part of the Tangle that is being pruned.
+ UTXO: Transactions whose outputs are unspent, remain after the snapshot.
+ Branches: We require that the at the point of pruning only master branch and rejected branch exist.
+ Markers: We require that the part of the Tangle being pruned is not actively dependent on Markers any more. 
+ Approval weight: We require that the approval weight is concluded at a time much before messages reach the pruning age.
+ Voting: We require that any voting is concluded much before messages reach the pruning age. 
+ Data flow: A weak past cone check is applied.

## 7.1.3 Proof of Inclusion and Pruning

In order to keep the ledger concise, data that is sufficiently old can be removed. We call this process pruning. Thus, the IOTA 2.0 protocol for a standard node does not attempt to keep all information back until the Genesis. Rather the protocol effectively becomes a mechanism to prove whether a certain message was, at some point in the past, included in the ledger. This can be done e.g. through a Merkle tree proof. 

> Transactions are payloads of value messages, that cannot be pruned. Specifically when a transaction contains an unspent output, see [5.1. UTXO](./5.1%20UTXO.md), the transaction shall be kept when pruning the ledger. An optimization of this process is possible by reducing the message to only keeping the information about the unspent outputs, however the implementation will be more complicated, and thus is not considered for this first iteration of the protocol.

Reviewer: This still says that we cannot prune value messages, but isnt the correct to say that we cannot rune them unless all their outputs are spent?

Author: you are correct. i rewrote it.

## 7.1.5 Pruning dependencies

We require several conditions to be fulfilled in order to allow for a smooth pruning process. Pruning is done when messages reach the age `DELTA_PRUNE`. 

> Since messages cannot attach to a message whose timestamp has an age difference of more than `DELTA`, see [4.3.4 R-URTS](./4.3%20Tip%20Selection%20Algorithm.md/#4.3.4%20R-URTS), and the timestamp precision is enforced through voting, see [4.2.3 General Timestamp rules](./4.2%20Timestamps.md/#4.2.3%20General%20Timestamp%20rules). 

Reviewer: This phrase has no Conclusion, you should say "Since A and B  happens, then C happens", but you just say "Since A and B happens". It may be that the "Since" is a typo, but it requires some change.

Author: typo. corrected it.

> Finalization of messages must be guaranteed to happen before the point of pruning. Thus, any message must be either confirmed or rejected before the elapse of the pruning age. This requires that both the filtering out of messages with wrong timestamps, voting on conflicts, as well as the accumulation of sufficient approval weight takes a time much smaller than `DELTA_PRUNE`. 

Reviewer: Rejected is a "status", opposite to "Accepted" (which means "belonging to the main branch"). Confirmed is a status of immutability, not on being on the main Branch. So the terms to be used are: "Confirmed accepted" (we used to call this finalized liked) and "Confirmed rejected/Orphaned".

Reviewer: You can align it with the terms used in line 33.

Author: done. its now confirmed accepted and confirmed rejected.

> Finalization of messages must be guaranteed to happen before the point of pruning. Thus, any message must be either confirmed or rejected before the elapse of the pruning age. This requires that both the filtering out of messages with wrong timestamps, voting on conflicts, as well as the accumulation of sufficient approval weight takes a time much smaller than `DELTA_PRUNE`. 

Reviewer: We dont use "Both" for 3 terms: 
```suggestion
Finalization of messages must be guaranteed to happen before the point of pruning. Thus, any message must be either confirmed or rejected before the elapse of the pruning age. This requires filtering out messages with wrong timestamps, voting on conflicts and that the accumulation of sufficient approval weight is much quicker than `DELTA_PRUNE`. 
```

Author: done

In order to allow a smooth pruning, any message at the age `DELTA_PRUNE` must either belong to the branch `masterBranch` or to a rejected branch. This simply means that messages are either confirmed or orphaned. 

Transaction must pass a weak past cone check, see [2.4.4.6 Booker - Point 7](./2.4%20Data%20Flow.md/#2.4.4.6%20Booker). 

With the above conditions we can safely assume any message before the time `DELTA_PRUNE>>DELTA` can be pruned. 

## 7.1.6 Pruning process

> An output is considered *confirmed* spent, when the message containing a transaction spending it is confirmed. A flag `confirmedSpent` *shall* be set to `TRUE` in the metadata of the output when this event is triggered.

Reviewer: Make a comment that this is only for value messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An UTXO output is considered *confirmed spent* , when the message containing a transaction spending it is confirmed accepted/liked. A flag `confirmedSpent` *shall* be set to `TRUE` in the metadata of the output when this event is triggered.
```

Once a message reaches the age `DELTA_PRUNE` several checks are performed:

> + If the message is a data message it can be removed. 

Reviewer: Making this change here since we never were clear that our many messages types, as the ones used in dRNG or FPC statements, are data messages.
```suggestion
+ If the message is not a value message it can be removed. 
```

> + If the message is a value message and is rejected, i.e. is member of the `rejectedBranch` it can be removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ If the message is a value message and is orphaned (i.e. is confirmed and a member of the `rejectedBranch`) it can be pruned.
```

> + If the message is a value message and is confirmed, i.e. is member of the `masterBranch` it is checked, whether any of the outputs is unspent, i.e. not confirmed spent. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ If the message is a value message and is confirmed accepted (i.e. is confirmed and a member of the `masterBranch`), it is checked whether any of the outputs is not confirmed spent.
```

> + If all outputs are confirmed spent the value message is removed. 

Reviewer: Still not sure why "Removed" some times and "Pruned" others
```suggestion
+ If all outputs are confirmed spent, then the value message is pruned. 
```

+ If any of the outputs is unspent, i.e. not confirmed spent, the message *shall* be stored, and its references to parents are set to the `genesis`.

## 7.1.7 Post pruning

> Transactions that are unspent at the time of pruning, remain in the database. Once all their outputs are confirmed spent, i.e. the flags `confirmedSpent` are `TRUE`, the transaction is deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transactions with unspent outputs at the time of pruning remain in the database. Once all their outputs are confirmed spent, i.e. the flags `confirmedSpent` are `TRUE`, the transaction is deleted.
```

# 7.1 Snapshot

## 7.1.1 Introduction
This section defines the *Snapshot* protocol.

## 7.1.2 Dependencies
The *Snapshotting* protocol depends on:

+ Timestamps: Core module to enable pruning.
+ Tip Selection Algorithm: No messages can be referenced for the part of the Tangle that is being pruned.
+ UTXO: Transactions whose outputs are unspent, remain after the snapshot.

> + Branches: We require that the at the point of pruning only master branch and rejected branch exist.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ Branches: We require that at the point of pruning only master branch and rejected branch exist.
```

Transactions are payloads of value messages, for which a more complex pruning mechanism is used. Specifically when a transaction contains an unspent output, see [5.1. UTXO](./5.1%20UTXO.md), the transaction shall be kept when pruning the ledger. A transaction can be pruned if all its outputs are spent. An optimization of this process is possible by reducing the message to only keeping the information about the unspent outputs, however the implementation will be more complicated, and thus is not considered for this first iteration of the protocol.

## 7.1.5 Pruning dependencies

Pruning of messages is done when messages reach the age `DELTA_PRUNE`, where the age of a message is the difference between now and the message timestamp. 

We require several conditions to be fulfilled in order to allow for a smooth pruning process: 

> - Messages cannot attach to a message whose timestamp has an age difference of more than `DELTA`, see [4.3.4 R-URTS](./4.3%20Tip%20Selection%20Algorithm.md/#4.3.4%20R-URTS).

Reviewer 3: I don't see DELTA in the tip_sel spec...
where is it defined?

Author: u r completely correct. the link was wrong and i updated it.

- Timestamps are sufficiently accurate.
- Messages can only create parent-child relationships with messages that have a timestamp that is more recent than a predefined age.
- Branches are cleaned up at the depth of pruning, i.e. all messages that have pruning age are either confirmed accepted or confirmed rejected.
- Transactions are only pruned once all of their outputs are confirmed spent. 

## 7.1.6 Pruning process

A UTXO output is considered *confirmed spent* , when the message containing a transaction spending it is confirmed accepted. A flag `confirmedSpent` *shall* be set to `TRUE` in the metadata of the output when this event is triggered.

Once a message reaches the age `DELTA_PRUNE` several checks are performed:

+ If the message is not a value message it can be removed. 
+ If the message is a value message and is confirmed rejected, i.e. orphaned, it can be pruned. 
+ If the message is a value message and is confirmed accepted (i.e. is confirmed and a member of the `masterBranch`), it is checked whether any of the outputs is not confirmed spent.
+ If all outputs are confirmed spent, then the value message is pruned. 

> + If any of the outputs is unspent, i.e. not confirmed spent, the message *shall* be stored, and its references to parents are set to the `genesis`.

Reviewer 2: `and its references to parents are set to the `genesis``
What exactly does that mean and why is it done?

Author: Actually this was related to the way i envisioned it to be implemented. but i think for the purpose of this document it just creates confusion and thus i removed it.

Author: ```suggestion
+ If any of the outputs is unspent, i.e. not confirmed spent, the message *shall* be stored, and kept until all outputs are confirmed spent.
```

> + If any of the outputs is unspent, i.e. not confirmed spent, the message *shall* be stored, and kept until all outputs are confirmed spent.

Author: ```suggestion
+ If any of the outputs are unspent, i.e. not confirmed spent, the message *shall* be stored, and kept until all outputs are confirmed spent.
```

- Finalization of messages must be guaranteed to happen before the point of pruning. Thus, any message must be either confirmed accepted or confirmed rejected before the elapse of the pruning age. 
- The filtering out of messages with wrong timestamps, voting on conflicts and the accumulation of sufficient approval weight takes a time much smaller than `DELTA_PRUNE`. 
- In order to allow a smooth pruning, any message at the age `DELTA_PRUNE` must either belong to the branch `masterBranch` or to a rejected branch. This simply means that messages are either confirmed or orphaned. 

With the above conditions we can safely assume any message before the time `DELTA_PRUNE>>DELTA` can be pruned. In summary this is for the following reasons:
- Timestamps are sufficiently accurate.
- Messages can only create parent-child relationships with messages that have a timestamp that is more recent than a predefined age.
- Branches are cleaned up at the depth of pruning, i.e. all messages that have pruning age are either confirmed accepted or confirmed rejected.
- Transactions are only pruned once all of their outputs are confirmed spent. 

## 7.1.6 Pruning process

> A UTXO output is considered *confirmed spent*, when the message containing a transaction spending it is confirmed accepted. A flag `confirmedSpent` *shall* be set to `TRUE` in the metadata of the output when this event is triggered.

Reviewer 3: I wonder if we need to get to such fine implementation details in the specs?
